 ▐▛███▛█   Claude Code v2.1.273
▝▜██████▀  Opus 5 · Claude Pro
  ▝▝ ▝▝    ~/nix-config

▎ Using Opus 5 (from .claude/settings.json) · /model

❯ how in ~/Zomboid with my settings it still no smooth ... i have 100fps but    
  with some frame lagging every 2sec and more when driving ...                  

● Skill(superpowers:systematic-debugging)
  ⎿  Successfully loaded skill

  Searched for 1 pattern, listed 1 directory, ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● The JVM is already tuned (12 GB heap, ZGC), so a 2-second hitch probably isn't
  the garbage collector. Checking what the game logs over and over while you
  play:

  Listed 1 directory, ran 6 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Your settings aren't the problem. The game gets plenty of power. The likely
  cause is mods doing work on the main game thread, and I can't prove that
  without watching it run.

  What I checked (nothing is obviously wrong):
  - Memory: Java has 12 GB fixed (-Xms/-Xmx in ProjectZomboid64.json) with ZGC,
    which pauses for less than a millisecond. The machine has 48 GB with none in
    swap.
  - Hardware: i7-10700K and RTX 5070, and the game and saves are on an NVMe
    drive.
  - Launch options: gamemoderun is on, and the CPU power mode is normal.
  - Logs: the errors all happen while the game loads. Nothing repeats every
    couple of seconds while you play.

  The likely cause: 318 mods. Project Zomboid runs all mod scripts on one
  thread, so any slow script freezes a frame. Some of yours hook into every tick
  or every player update: Bandits2 (NPC AI, known to be heavy), PZTheMutants,
  Secretz42, Military Tool Kit, KillCount, Authentic Z, and a lot of vehicle
  mods. Driving makes it worse because the game loads new map areas from disk as
  you move (your map mods add more of these) and spawns zombies, all on that
  same thread.

  Checks to find it, cheapest first:

  1. See whether the spikes are regular. Mangohud already shows a frame-time
     graph. If the spikes are evenly spaced, a mod running on a timer is doing
     it. If they're random and only while driving, it's map loading.
  2. Rule out Java's memory cleanup for sure. Add this to vmArgs in
     ~/.local/share/Steam/steamapps/common/ProjectZomboid/projectzomboid/Project
     Zomboid64.json (Steam updates will reset it):
  "-Xlog:gc*:file=/tmp/pz-gc.log:time,uptime",
     Play for 2 minutes, then paste me the log. If nothing lines up with the
     stutters, this cause is ruled out.
  3. Test without mods. Start a new game with zero mods and drive the same way.
     If it's smooth, the mods are the cause. Then halve the mod list and test
     again: turn off Bandits2 first, then the map mods, then the vehicle packs.
  4. Two quick changes to try:
     - Remove __GL_THREADED_OPTIMIZATIONS=1 from the launch options. NVIDIA's
       threaded OpenGL mode can itself cause hitching in some games, so try one
       session without it.
     - Set a frame cap near what you actually get (frameRate=240 → 90 or 60
       in-game). At an uncapped 100 fps with vsync off, uneven frame times are
       easier to notice, and the cap leaves CPU time spare for the mod work.

  I haven't changed anything in the repo, and nothing in your NixOS gaming
  modules is causing this. Send me the Mangohud graph pattern or the GC log and
  I can narrow it down.

✻ Crunched for 1m 12s · done 4:24 PM

❯ i played a see the lag                                                        

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● The GC log flag is set, but /tmp/pz-gc.log isn't there. The Steam sandbox may
  have its own /tmp. Looking for it:

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Seeing the lag again doesn't narrow anything down by itself, and this session
  didn't record what I needed:

  - GC log: Java did pick up the -Xlog:gc* flag (it shows up in
    projectzomboid.sh.log), but /tmp/pz-gc.log was never written. Steam on NixOS
    probably runs the game with its own private /tmp, so the file went
    somewhere I can't see.
  - Game log: nothing repeats during play. There's one Bandits spawn line and
    the save-on-exit lines, and nothing that happens every 2 seconds.
  - Threaded optimizations: you've already removed __GL_THREADED_OPTIMIZATIONS=1
    and it still stutters, so that one is ruled out.

  Next run. In ProjectZomboid64.json, point the log at your home folder instead:
  "-Xlog:gc*:file=/home/wallago/Zomboid/pz-gc.log:time,uptime",

  Then play about 2 minutes, drive for part of it, and tell me:
  1. Mangohud frame-time graph: are the spikes evenly spaced (like a clock) or
     random? Roughly how tall do they get (for example 30 ms, 100 ms)?
  2. Exit the game so the log gets written, then say "done". I'll read
     ~/Zomboid/pz-gc.log and match its pause times against your stutters.

  If the GC log shows no pauses longer than a few ms, memory cleanup is ruled
  out. The next step is then the no-mods test from before: a new game with zero
  mods, driving the same way. It's the quickest way to confirm whether the mods
  cause it.

✻ Cogitated for 26s · done 4:38 PM

※ recap: We're tracking down Project Zomboid's stutter, which likely comes from your 318 mods; last session's memory log never got saved. Next, set the log path in ProjectZomboid64.json to /home/wallago/Zomboid/pz-gc.log, play two minutes, exit, and tell me. (disable recaps in /config)

❯ and now ?                                                                     

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● The GC log is being written and the game is still running, so I can read it
  now:

  Ran 3 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● GC is ruled out. Before I write that up, the game is still running, so I'll
  check which threads are using the CPU:

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Java's garbage collector is not the cause. The new clue is that the game's
  main thread is maxed out.

  GC log, about 3.5 minutes of play:
  - The longest pause was 0.021 ms. A frame at 100 fps is 10 ms, so no pause
    comes close to causing a hitch.
  - During play the collector ran every 20–30 seconds, not every 2 seconds. So
    its timing doesn't match your stutter either.
  - Java stalled on memory once, at 82 s, while the world was still loading (8.7
    GB in use). Nothing like that happened after you were in the game.
  - The heap only reached 24–51% of 12 GB, so 12 GB is plenty.

  Per-thread CPU, sampled while you were playing:
  MainThread     98.8%   ← one full core, maxed out
  LightingThread 40.9%
  (others)       ~35% ×2, rest idle
  Almost everything in Project Zomboid runs on that one thread: game logic,
  zombies, all mod scripts, world loading and the draw calls. When it's already
  at 100%, any extra work makes a frame late, and you feel that as a hitch.
  Driving adds the most extra work, because you cross map areas faster and more
  of the world gets loaded.

  One caveat: with the cap at 240 fps, the main thread will always use a full
  core, so 99% on its own doesn't prove the thread is overloaded. That's why the
  next test matters.

  Test 1: cap the frame rate. Set the in-game frame limit to 60, then drive. If
  the main thread drops below 100%, it has spare time to absorb the extra work,
  and the stutter should shrink or go away. Tell me when you're driving and I'll
  sample the threads again.

  Test 2: see what the main thread spends its time on. Add this to vmArgs in
  ProjectZomboid64.json:
  "-XX:StartFlightRecording=duration=120s,filename=/home/wallago/Zomboid/pz.jfr,
  settings=profile",
  Load in, drive for about 2 minutes, then exit. The recording will show whether
  the time goes to mod scripts, world loading or rendering. It records the
  script engine rather than individual mod names, but that's enough to know
  whether to cut mods or look elsewhere.

  My bet is still the mods (Bandits2 first). These tests will show it instead of
  me guessing. Start with the 60 fps cap, since it's a single setting.

✻ Baked for 42s · done 4:44 PM

※ recap: We're fixing the Project Zomboid stutter; Java's garbage collector is ruled out, and the game's main thread is maxed at 100%. Next, set the in-game frame limit to 60, drive, and tell me so I can sample the threads again. (disable recaps in /config)

❯ is it good ?                                                                  

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● The 2-minute recording (pz.jfr) was saved. frameRate is still 240, so the
  recording ran uncapped. Reading it with the jfr tool that ships with the
  game's Java:

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Most of the recording is just game loading time (~80s), which explains why PNG
  decoding and tile definitions dominate the top. I'll trim it down to the main
  thread activity after loading completes.

  Ran 3 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● No, this recording can't tell us about the stutter yet. It ran out during the 
  loading screen: the main thread was still drawing GameLoadingState at the 120
  s mark, so none of your driving is in it. Also, frameRate is still 240, so the
  60 fps cap wasn't tested.

  One real lead from it. While loading, about 90% of the main thread's time went
  into one step. After a texture finishes loading in the background, the main
  thread shrinks it and builds its smaller versions (mipmaps). In the profile
  that's TextureID.limitMaxSize → generateMipMaps → scaleMipLevelMaxAlpha.

  The shrinking happens because of two settings in your options.ini:
  maxTextureSize=2
  maxVehicleTextureSize=2
  Every mod texture bigger than that limit gets downscaled on the main thread.
  If the game also loads textures during play, which is likely but not proven,
  then each new car, outfit or zombie variant that comes into view would cost a
  hitch. Driving shows you new ones faster. That would fit your symptoms,
  especially with dozens of HD vehicle and clothing mods.

  Next run, which will capture actual gameplay:

  1. Change the recording line in ProjectZomboid64.json so it waits until you're
     in the game:
  "-XX:StartFlightRecording=delay=240s,duration=120s,filename=/home/wallago/Zomb
  oid/pz.jfr,settings=profile",
     Load in. Once you're past 4 minutes in total, drive for 2 minutes, then
     exit.
  2. Leave the texture settings alone for this run, so the recording shows the
     problem as it is now.

  If limitMaxSize / generateMipMaps show up on the main thread while driving,
  try raising both texture size settings to the maximum in the display options.
  The game then doesn't shrink textures and skips that main-thread work, at the
  cost of more VRAM, and your 16 GB is enough. If they don't show up, the
  recording will show what's using the time instead.

✻ Worked for 1m 8s · done 5:04 PM

❯ could i make test for 120fps ? 60 is too low i want at leas 120               

● Yes, 120 is a fine goal, but a 120 cap won't tell us anything. Right now the
  game only reaches about 100 fps with the main thread maxed out, so a 120 cap
  would never kick in. The thread would stay at 100% and the result would look
  the same as your last run.

  The 60 cap is only a one-minute test, not a setting to keep. It answers one
  question: if the main thread gets spare time, do the hitches go away?
  - Yes: the main thread is simply overloaded. The fix is to take work off it
    (texture settings, heavy mods). Once that's done, 120+ is realistic, and
    you'd also see it during a normal 120 fps session.
  - No, hitches still happen at 60: something causes each spike by itself,
    whatever the frame rate. The recording will show what it is.

  If 60 really bothers you even for a minute, 90 also works, since it's below
  your current ~100.

  What to do:
  1. Set the frame limit to 60 (or 90), drive for 1 minute, and tell me whether
     the hitches got better, stayed the same, or got worse.
  2. Set it back to 240 and do the gameplay recording from my last message
     (delay=240s).

  Once the recording shows what's using the main thread, we can work on getting
  you to a smooth 120.

✻ Crunched for 8s · done 5:06 PM

※ recap: You're working toward smooth 120 fps in Project Zomboid, where main-thread hitches currently show up when driving. Next, drive for one minute capped at 60 or 90 fps, then run the delayed gameplay recording and share both results. (disable recaps in /config)